INTRO
    Our daily conversations are filled with questions. Therefore, in order
to communicate effectively using ASL, you’ll need to learn how to ask
and receive questions. This lesson will teach you to form questions
and apply them with appropriate facial expressions.

TWO TYPES OF QUESTIONS
    The first type of questions are “wh-” words: who, what, when,
where, why, which, and how. Questions that use these words ask for specific
information. The second category is “yes-no” questions. These questions can be
answered with a simple yes or no.
    Both of these question types need to be supported by specific facial
expressions with nonmanual behaviors. Nonmanual behaviors do not use the
hands. Instead, these behaviors use the eyes, facial expressions, head movement,
body posture, or body language. Signers use nonmanual behaviors to show
emotion, emphasize a point, make a negative statement, and ask questions.
Facial expressions are equal to vocal intonation. When you do not apply the
proper facial expressions and nonmanual behaviors, your questions may not be
interpreted correctly.

WH- WORDS
When asking a wh-word question, do the following:
• Furrow your eyebrows together
• Tilt your head forward
• Make direct eye contact
• Hold your last sign
    Take a minute now and sign the alphabet in order to refresh these handshapes in
your mind. Throughout this book, the directions on how to form signs will refer
to handshapes, such as the “D” hand or “F” hand. These instructions are simply
describing a handshape and generally, there is minimal association with the letter
value.

WHO: Use the “L” hand and place your thumb in the cleft of your chin and flick the tip of your index finger. Variation: Use your index finger and circle your mouth.

WHAT/HUH?: Position both right and left “flat” hands, palms up, just above your waist in front of you. Next, move hands horizontally outward and back. Picture this as a double handed karatemovement, this is the newest and natural variation of this sign. Variation (What): It is important for you to know and recognize the older variation for this sign as it is still used, though becoming infrequent. Extend the index finger of the right hand and draw the fingertip downward across the left “open” palm.

WHEN: Hold your left hand with the index finger pointing up, palm facing right. Move your extended right index finger in a clockwise circle around your left index finger. Variation: A natural way to sign “when” is to simply shrug the shoulders. Use both right and left hands in “flat” handshapes, palms up, just above the waist in front of you. Next move hands horizontally upward and out in a natural form that would accompany shrugged shoulders.

WHERE: Repeatedly shake your extended index finger right to left. Variation: Use both right and left hands in “flat” handshape, palms up, just above the waist in front of you, hands move back and forth several times displaying frustration.

WHY: Place the fingertips on your temple and pull down and out, forming into the letter “Y”.

WHY Variation: This variation is commonly used; place the fingertips on the temple and pull down and out while wiggling the bent middle finger.



YES-NO QUESTIONS
When asking a yes-no question, do the following:
• Raise your eyebrows to widen your eyes
• Tilt your head slightly forward
• Make direct eye contact
• Hold the last sign in your sentence
Occasionally, a yes-no question is accompanied by a question mark:

QUESTION MARK : Use your index finger and trace a question mark exactly as you would write it.
YES: Shake the “S” hand up and down. An affirmative head nod should always accompany this sign.
NO: Touch your index and middle fingers quickly to your extended thumb. The sign for “no” is small and can be easily missed. A negative headshake should always accompany this sign as it ensures your answer.



INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
    During your sign language journey, chances are good that you will meet a
member of the Deaf community. You will need to be prepared to answer a few
questions. It is natural and considered a part of the culture for a member of the
Deaf community to ask you several questions. The reason for these many
questions is to establish a connection back to the Deaf community.
    Looking at the following chart of interview questions, you will notice that the
questions are written in English order and then the questions are written in
approximate ASL sign order. The answers are presented in a simple ASL sign
order. At first, this sign order will sound strange to your auditory ear. You must
keep in mind that sign language is a visual language. Therefore, how it sounds
grammatically is not relative to the way it is received through the eyes. The sign
order, as written, is perfectly acceptable. Remember:
• When signing the whwords, your eyebrows are down and furrowed.
• When answering yes, use a nod.
• When answering no, shake your head.
    Adapting to ASL sign order, facial expressions, and nonmanual behaviors are
skills that develop slowly with practice and experience. At this point, your
primary focus is learning to form the signs accurately, while gradually learning
how to apply these additional elements. In order to do this, you will need to
practice signing these questions and responses the way they have been written in
the chart. SHOW CHART

INTERVIEW: Use both “I” hands at each corner of your mouth, and alternately move back and forth from your lips.

NAME: Cross and tap the “H” hands twice.

I, ME: Use your index finger and point to the center of your chest.

MINE: Place your “flat” hand, palm inward on your chest.

YOUR: Move your “flat” hand, palm forward, toward the reader.

LIVE/ADDRESS: Use both “A” hands, palms facing your body, starting at the lower chest and moving upward. Variation: Use both “L” hands, palms facing the body, starting at the lower chest and moving upward.

HOUSE: Touch the fingertips of the “flat” hands, palms facing and forming a peak, imitating the roof of a house.

CITY, TOWN, COMMUNITY: Touch the fingertips of the “flat” hands, palms facing and forming a “peak,” tap, and slightly twist several times, imitating multiple roofs. Variation: Touch the fingertips of the “flat” hands, palms facing and forming a “peak,” tap and separate two or three times while moving the house/buildings to the side.

WORK: Use both “S ”hands, palms facing down, tap your right wrist on the back of your left fist a few times.

LEARN: Place all the fingertips of your right hand into your left palm. Next pull up your right hand with a modified “O” and place it on your forehead. Note: The action of the sign suggests putting knowledge into the mind.

DEAF: Use your index finger and touch your cheek near the ear, and then near the corner of your mouth.

MEET: Hold your right and left index fingersupward, palms facing, then bring the hands together until they meet.

NICE: Use right and left “flat” hands, slide the palm of your right hand forward across the left upturned palm, imitating cleaning a counter.

    To sign “nice to meet you,” combine “nice” and “meet” only. There is no need
to sign “you”, this information is provided by the directionality of the sign
“meet”.


RHETORICAL QUESTIONS
    The facial expressions and nonmanual behaviors used when asking a rhetorical
question include raising the eyebrows and tilting the head to the side and back.
However, rhetorical questions are not true questions, and a response is not
expected. It is the signer’s intention, immediately following this type of
question, to supply the answers and information. Rhetorical questions are
commonly used in ASL and in the Deaf community. Using this type of question
allows a signer to quickly get the attention of others and to introduce a new
subject or information.