Notes from:
- The Everything Sign Language Book 2nd Edition by Irene Duke Chapter 8


INTRO
    This lesson will introduce simple numbers and give you a guideline
to master the basic formations. You will learn to form signed numbers
with ease and quickly be counting up to a million on one hand. Along
the way, you’ll also learn how to sign fractions.



SITUATIONS THAT CALL FOR NUMBERS
    You use many different kinds of numbers in your daily conversation. For
instance, a conversation might include a phone number, credit card number, and
so forth. Now it’s time for you to learn how to use numbers in ASL.
Unfortunately, a novice signer often feels that numbers are confusing and
somewhat complicated. In order to minimize confusion, this lesson will take a
look at examples of numbers that seem to be the pitfalls for new signers. These
particular numbers are the ones that share the same handshapes as the letters of
the alphabet, thus causing the confusion. The context of a conversation generally
adds the clarity that is needed to distinguish between a signed number and letter.
    The way numbers are signed can vary according to region. In some regions, the
numbers are signed with the palms facing you; in others, the palm is facing the
reader. Both palm positions are correct, depending on your geographical region
and perhaps on your ASL teacher as well.



COUNTING TO TEN
    Counting to ten is easy. You have been doing this since you were a child. In this
case, however, there is one difference. When you were a child, you had to use
two hands to count this high. In sign language, you can count to ten (and much
higher) using just one hand!

NUMBER: Touch the fingertips of both flattened “O” hands, and pivot back and forth alternately.

ZERO: Form the letter “O,” palm facing left. The sign for the number “0” will be used in forming other numbers.

ONE: Hold your index finger upright in the vertical position, palm forward, all other fingers tucked away.

TWO: Hold your index and middle fingers slightly spread apart, upright in the vertical position, palm forward, all other fingers tucked away.

THREE: Hold your index finger, middle finger, and thumb slightly spread apart, upright in the vertical position, palm forward, all other fingers tucked away.

FOUR: Hold your index, middle, ring, and pinky fingers apart, in the vertical position, palm forward, and thumb tucked into the palm.

FIVE: Hold all fingers spread apart, upright in the vertical position, palm forward.

The counting process changes for six through nine. It’s easy; you only need to touch a specific finger to your thumb.

SIX: Touch your pinky finger to your thumb. Note: The number “6” looks like a “W.” The context of a conversation will help you to differentiate between numbers and letters.

SEVEN: Touch your ring finger to your thumb.

EIGHT: Touch your middle finger to your thumb.

NINE: Touch your index finger to your thumb. Note: If you’re thinking that the number “9” is another example of duplicity, you’re right again. It has the same handshape as the letter “F”.

TEN: Extend your thumb on the “A” hand and pivot your wrist to the right.

    You made it to ten counting on one hand! Let’s do a quick review of how you
accomplished this. In sign language, the pinky finger represents the number “6”.
The ring finger represents the number “7.” The middle finger represents the
number “8.” The index finger represents the number “9.” When you lightly
touch any of these four fingers separately to the thumb, this action confirms the
number position.
    Now, let’s examine those numbers and letters that share the same handshapes
and that are the cause of some confusion for novice signers:
• The number “2” is formed in the same way as the letter “V”
• The number “6” is formed in the same way as the letter “W”
• The number “9” is formed in the same way as the letter “F”
• The number “10” is formed in the same way as the letter “A”, but with the addition of a twist of the wrist



NUMBER HANDSHAPES AS DESCRIPTORS
    You will find that the handshapes of numbers are also used as descriptors.
Instructions in sign language dictionaries often refer to numbers to describe
handshapes. For example, you may see entries that tell you to use the “one” hand
or to use the “three” hand. Knowing how to form all the handshapes, including numbers, is a
very important part of your new journey into this visual language.



COUNTING 11-20
    Now it’s time to move on and learn the next section of numbers. As a memory
guide to help you along, the numbers “11” through “15” will be referred to as the
“flicks” (You’ll see why in just a moment). Look back at the images of “1”
through “5” and set them in your mind. The reason; numbers “11” to “15” use
the same handshapes as numbers “1” through “5.”

ELEVEN: With your palm facing you, flick your index finger twice.

TWELVE: With your palm facing you, flick your index and middle fingers twice.

THIRTEEN: With your palm facing you, flick your thumb, index, and middle fingers twice.

FOURTEEN: With your palm facing you, flick your index, middle, ring, and pinky fingers twice.

FIFTEEN: With your palm facing you, flick the “open five” hand.

    Moving right along, let’s take on numbers “16” through “19,” which are
referred to as the “swing-outs.” The good news is that the finger positions for
numbers that contain a “6” through “9” remain constant. These numbers begin
with the palm facing you and then swing out to the right ending with the palm
facing forward. Forming the number “16” begins by touching the thumb to the
pinky, palm facing you, then swinging out to face the receiver. The numbers
“17” through “19” are formed in the same manner, by first touching your thumb
to the appropriate fingers then swinging out.

SIXTEEN: Touch your thumb to your pinky, palm facing you, then swing your hand out to the right, ending with palm forward.

SEVENTEEN: Touch your thumb to your ring finger, palm facing you, then swing your hand out to the right, ending with palm forward.

EIGHTEEN: Touch your thumb to your middle finger, palm facing you, then swing your hand out to the right, ending with palm forward.

NINETEEN: Touch your thumb to your index finger, palm facing you, then swing your hand out to the right, ending with palm forward.

The sign for “20” is a stand-alone sign.

TWENTY: Use your index and thumb only, all other fingers tucked away. Bring your index finger and thumb together while slightly pulling back.



COUNTING TO 90
    In order to form the handshapes for
the numbers “30”, “40”, “50”, “60”, “70”, “80”, and “90” you will need to sign
the basic number first, such as “3”, “4”, or “5”. You will then sign a “0” (zero).
A memory aid for these numbers is an easy formula: The number then changes
to zero.

THIRTY: Sign the number “3” then a zero, “0”.

FOURTY: Sign the number “4” then a zero, “0”.

FIFTY: Sign the number “5” then a zero, “0”.

SIXTY: Sign the number “6” then a zero, “0”.

SEVENTY: Sign the number “7” then a zero, “0”.

EIGHTY: Sign the number “8” then a zero, “0”.

NINETY: Sign the number “9” then a zero, “0”.



BIG NUMBERS
    You have made it all the way up to “99.” Now you will begin working on large
numbers. The big numbers—hundreds, thousands, millions—require the simple
application of modified Roman numerals. These signs are compound signs.
    The letter “C” represents the Roman numeral for “hundred.” When you want to sign
a number in the hundreds, you form the number, then add the letter “C.” For
example, if you sign “1” then the letter “C” this equals “100”. You can continue
in the same pattern for “200”, “300”, “400”, and so on. A good memory aid: A
hundred-dollar bill is often referred to as a “C note”.
    The letter “M” represents the Roman numeral for “thousand.” When you want
to sign a number in the thousands you form the number, and add the letter “M.”
It is the same pattern that you use for forming numbers in the hundreds. A
“million” is signed by tapping the letter “M” twice in the palm.

HUNDRED: Place the letter “C” in the left palm.

THOUSAND: Tap the extended fingers of the letter “M” once in your left palm.



FRACTIONS
    Fractions are signed exactly the way they appear, one number over the other.
First sign the top number, the numerator, followed by the bottom number, the
denominator. In this example, the visual of a “1” above a “2” demonstrates a
numeric fraction. Use this same pattern and order of signs for all fractions.

ONE-HALF: Form the handshape “1”, move hand down slightly and change to the handshape of “2”.



CONVERSATIONS WITH LETTERS AND NUMBERS
    When a conversation occurs that requires both letters and numbers, such as a
password or an e-mail address, the dilemma can be resolved in two easy ways.
The first solution is to slightly shake the numbers back and forth while
maintaining a smooth flow for the letters. This slight movement helps to
establish that you are signing a number and not a letter. The second solution is to
sign all numbers with the palm facing you and all letters with the palm facing the
reader. Of these two methods, the first one, shaking the numbers, is the easiest
for the novice signer.
    Numbers fill your daily life. To help manage all those numbers, an easy rule to
follow is to sign numbers exactly the way they are spoken. When you want to
tell someone your phone number, you will sign numbers in groups as they are
written. Phone numbers are grouped with the area code first, followed by three
numbers, then by four numbers. To sign your phone number, simply hesitate just
a bit in between each group of numbers: “555” (hesitate), “555” (hesitate),
“5555.” Don’t drop your hands; just hesitate.

Here is an example of the two different ways you could sign the number “1,900”:
• 1. When referring to “1900” as “nineteen hundred,” sign “19,” followed by the letter “C,” representing the Roman numeral for 100.
• 2. When signing “1900” to represent “one thousand nine hundred,” sign “1,” followed by “M,” representing the Roman numeral for 1,000, then “9,” followed by “C.” Memory aid: Numbers are signed the way you say them.