Notes from:
- The Everything Sign Language Book 2nd Edition by Irene Duke Chapter 4



INTRO
    Fingerspelling is the letter representation of each of the twenty-six
letters of the alphabet. The use of fingerspelling is limited in ASL. It is
primarily used to communicate places and names when no formal
recognized signs exist. Fingerspelling has very specific rules and only
represents about 10 percent of the language’s overall elements.
However, mastering the manual alphabet is an important complement
to ASL. This skill will assist you in understanding the handshapes of
the signs you will learn throughout Handango. In this lesson, you will
find fingerspelling exercises to help you master the manual alphabet.



SITUATIONS THAT CALL FOR FINGERSPELLING
    When you don’t know a sign for a word, try to describe it by acting it out,
pointing, miming, or drawing it. Don’t use fingerspelling as your first choice
when you don’t know a sign. Fingerspelling is not a substitute for signing; it is
used for words when a sign does not exist. In ASL, fingerspelling is only used
approximately 10 percent of the time and should only be used for:
• Proper names
• Names of towns, cities, and states
• Specific brand names of products or services
• Titles of books and movies



TIPS FOR BECOMING AN ACCURATE FINGERSPELLER
• Make sure your palm faces the receiver/reader.
• Hold your dominant hand slightly to the right of your face and just below the chin.
• Make sure your elbow is close to your body.
• Do not bounce the letters.
• Relax, and let the letters flow smoothly.
• Speed is not important; it is the clarity of the formation of each letter that matters.
• Do not say or mouth single letters.
• Move slightly to the right or slide slightly to the right for double letters.
• Practice fingerspelling with your elbow resting on a table or desk.

    Bobber-weaver syndrome is when the signer fingerspells and
moves her wrist and hand position, like a car weaving out of control. This
pattern and flow is erratic, making it difficult to comprehend what is being
fingerspelled.
    The “wing-thing” is when the signer, while fingerspelling,
constantly lifts her elbow away from the body, as if about to take flight.
    To help control and prevent these errors, here are a few tricks that you can
learn. During an ASL conversation in which you fingerspell, use your left arm as
a support for your right elbow. (If your left hand is dominant, then use your right
for support). Another way to stabilize your hand and arm is to
hold your wrist with your left hand, just below the wrist bone. This enables you
to immediately feel when your fingerspelling becomes out of control or is
starting to take flight. For the novice signer, another less obvious stabilizer is to
place the left index finger on the front of the right wrist.
    While practicing fingerspelling, try applying these small safeguards for a nice
steady and smooth flow. Believe it or not, before you even realize it, you will not
need to apply these fingerspelling safeguards at all. In the beginning, though,
these serve as control mechanisms that help the novice signer quite nicely.



HAND WARMUP FOR PRACTICE
    When you fingerspell, you will be using your hands in a manner that you’re not
accustomed to. Therefore, to prevent any discomfort, it’s a good idea to do some
hand exercises and warm-ups, for example:
1. Shake your hands briskly with your fingers parted.
2. Stretch your hand to an open-finger “five” position until you can feel the skin stretching between each finger.
3. Create a piano strum, starting with your pinky, and ending with your index finger.



INSTRUCTIONS FOR EACH LETTER
“A” HAND : Make a fist with your dominant hand, make sure your thumb is on the side of the fist and not within it.

“B” HAND : All fingers are vertical and pressed together and your thumb is curled in to your palm.

“C” HAND : Form a “C” with all fingers neatly together. Your palm is facing left.

“D” HAND : Curl your fingers down onto your thumb except for the index finger, which remains vertical. Hint: “Dump” all your fingers on the thumb except the index finger.

“E” HAND : Curl all fingers down and tuck the thumb into the palm.

“F” HAND : Pinch the index finger to the thumb. Middle, ring, and pinky fingers are vertical. Hint: Imagine the last three fingers as a mini flag.

“G” HAND : Extend your thumb and index finger facing left, position hand facing slightly left. Middle, ring, and pinky fingers are tucked into palm.

“H” HAND : Place your index finger on top of your middle finger facing left, with your thumb tucked away behind the two fingers.

“I” HAND : Make a fist, hold your pinky finger vertical.

“J” HAND : Make a fist, hold your pinky finger vertical, and draw a “J” shape inward. Hint: “J” is the same handshape as “I” with a simple movement added.

“K” HAND : Place your thumb between your index and middle fingers, which are held vertically. Ring and pinky fingers are tucked into the palm.

“L” HAND : Make a fist, leave your index finger vertical and extend the thumb.

“M” HAND : Tuck your thumb into palm, then wrap your index, middle, and ring fingers over the thumb. Hint: Visualize a lowercase “m” with its three lines thus, the three fingers.

“N” HAND : Tuck your thumb into palm, then wrap your index and middle fingers over the thumb. Hint: Visualize a lowercase “n” with its two lines, thus the two fingers.

“O” HAND : Form a nice round “O” by resting all the fingers on the thumb.

“P” HAND : Place your thumb between the index and middle fingers. Ring and pinky fingers are tucked into the palm. Drop your wrist downward. Hint: The letter “P” is made the same as the letter “K,” except, the P “points” downward.

“Q” HAND : Extend your thumb and index finger downward. Tuck middle, ring, and pinky fingers into your palm. Hint: The letter “Q” is made like the letter “G,” but with the wrist downward.

“R” HAND : Cross your index and middle fingers. Thumb, ring, and pinky fingers are tucked into palm.

“S” HAND : Make a fist, place your thumb in front of your fingers. Hint: The letters “A” and “S” are easily confused. For “A,” place your thumb on the side of your fist: for “S,” place and “show” your thumb in front of your fingers.

“T” HAND : Make a fist. Tuck your thumb between your index and middle fingers.

“U” HAND : Hold your index and middle fingers vertical. Tuck your thumb, ring, and pinky fingers into your palm.

“V” HAND : Your index and middle fingers are held vertical and spread open, creating a “V.” Tuck your thumb, ring, and pinky fingers into your palm.

“W” HAND : Your index, middle, and ring fingers are held vertical and spread open, creating a “W.” Hold your pinky finger down with your thumb.

“X” HAND : Make a fist leaving your index finger vertical but bent into a hook shape.

“Y” HAND : Extend your thumb and pinky finger. Tuck your index, middle, and ring fingers into your palm.

“Z” HAND : Make a fist with your index finger extended, then make the shape of the letter “Z” in the air. Hint: Think of “Zorro.”



ADDITIONAL USES FOR FINGERSPELLING
    Initialized signs, also known as borrowed signs, are signs that, in general,
borrow the first letter of words. These signed words require placing and/or moving
a letter of the manual alphabet in specific locations on or around the body.
    Another way the letters of the manual alphabet are used is in the application of
fingerspelled “loan signs” and fingerspelled abbreviations. “Loan signs” have
unique patterns and movements. They normally have two to five letters, and they
are commonly used words. It should be noted that "loan signs" also have regular whole
ASL signs, so you can think of "loan signs" like saying "y'all" instead of "you all".
These words are all formed and shaped in various patterns, like so:
• “Bus” is fingerspelled using “B” to “S” in a vertical, downward movement.
• “All” is fingerspelled using “A” to “L” in a sweeping movement from left to right.



ABBREVIATIONS
    Everyday words can quickly be abbreviated applying the manual alphabet.
Often, it is manually abbreviated words like these that become the recognized
loan signs in time:
• “Air-conditioning” is fingerspelled using “A,” and “C” in place.
• “Barbecue” is fingerspelled using “B,” “B,” and “Q” in place.
• “High School” is fingerspelled using “H,” and “S” in place.
• “Identification” is fingerspelled using “I,” and “D” in place.
• “Avenue” is fingerspelled using “A,” “V,” and “E” in place.
• “Boulevard” is fingerspelled using “B,” “L,” “V,” and “D” in place.
• “Overtime” is fingerspelled using “O,” and “T” in place.
Lastly, here is a cute abbreviation: Form the letter “P.” Now trace the letter
“Z” in front of you. You’ve just ordered a “pizza”! This is just one of the many
different and fun ways you can sign “pizza.”